---
layout: default
title: Input handling with passion.Actor
permalink: processing-input
---

We're going to continue with our parrot. This time we'll make it move depending on the user's input.

{% highlight lua linenos %}
-- file main.lua
-- draws a parrot and moves it using the keyboard

require('passion/init.lua')

-- assumes there's an image/parrot.png file
local image = passion.graphics.getImage('images/parrot.png')

Parrot = class('Parrot', passion.Actor)

function Parrot:initialize(image)
  super.initialize(self)
  self:setPosition(100,100)
  self.image = image
 
  for _,direction in ipairs({'left', 'right', 'up', 'down'}) do
    self:observe('keypressed_' .. direction, function(self) self['_' .. direction] = true end)
    self:observe('keyreleased_' .. direction, function(self) self['_' .. direction] = false end)
  end

end

function Parrot:update(dt)
  local x,y = self:getPosition()
  if(self._right) then x = x + dt 
  elseif(self._left) then x = x - dt
  end
  if(self._up) then y = y - dt 
  elseif(self._down) then y = y + dt
  end

  self:setPosition(x,y)
end

function Parrot:draw()
  love.graphics.draw(self.image, self:getPosition())
end

parrot = Parrot:new()
{% endhighlight %}

The first interesting bit happens on the loop taking place between lines 16 and 18.

The program iterates over an array (@{'left','right','up','down'}@) and it makes the parrot "observe" some key presses and releases. This way, when the 'up' key is pressed, a member variable (@self._up@) is set to true. And it is set to false when the key is released.

Once the @_left@, @_right@, @_up@ and @_down@ member variables are correctly set up, the @update@ method on line 23 just has to check them and move the bird accordingly.

Similarly to keypresses and keyreleases, PÄSSION provides functions for handling mouse and joystick input.


